PHP: add new builder for PHP projects (#225401)
NixOS/nixpkgs: doc/languages-frameworks/php.section.md

One such method is the `php.buildComposerProject` function, which serves as a
wrapper around `mkDerivation`.

Using this function, you can build a PHP project that includes both a
`composer.json` and `composer.lock` file. If the project specifies binaries
using the `bin` attribute in `composer.json`, these binaries will be
automatically linked and made accessible in the derivation.

To use the wrapper effectively, simply add the `vendorHash` attribute, which
enables the wrapper to handle the heavy lifting.

Internally, the wrapper operates in three stages:

1. It constructs a `vendor cache` derivation by downloading the dependencies
   specified in `composer.json`. This process uses the function
   `php.buildComposerDeps` which in turn uses the
   `php.composerHooks.composerSetupHook` hook.
2. The resulting `vendor cache` derivation is then used by the
   `php.composerHooks.composerInstallHook` hook, which is responsible for
   creating the final `vendor` directory from the temporary `vendor cache`
   directory.
3. Any binary specified in the `composer.json` are linked and made accessible in
   the derivation.

> By default, the Composer commands adds the following command line flags:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Composer commands are called with the following command line flags:
```

Author: fixed

>  - `--no-dev`: User configurable, skip installing packages listed in
>   `require-dev`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `--no-dev` to skip installing packages listed in `require-dev`, pass `installComposerDevDependencies = true;` to override.
```

Reviewer: Or alternately, focus on the arguments, we are not composer docs

```suggestion
 - `installComposerDevDependencies`: set to `true` to not pass `--no-dev` to `composer install`.
```

Author: fixed, for the 3 of them

  };

  # PHP version containing the `ast` extension enabled
  php = php.buildEnv {
    extensions = ({ enabled, all }: enabled ++ (with all; [
      ast
    ]));
  };

  vendorHash = "sha256-86s/F+/5cBAwBqZ2yaGRM5rTGLmou5//aLRK5SA0WiQ=";

  # If the composer.lock file is missing from the repository, add it:
  # composerLock = ./path/to/composer.lock;
})
```

In case the file `composer.lock` is missing from the repository, it is possible
to specify it using the `composerLock` attribute.

The other method is to use all these methods and hooks individually. This has
the advantage of building a PHP library within another derivation very easily.

Here's a working code example to build a PHP library using `mkDerivation` and
separate functions and hooks:

```nix
{ stdenvNoCC, lib, fetchFromGitHub, php }:

stdenvNoCC.mkDerivation (finalAttrs:
let
  src = fetchFromGitHub {
    owner = "git-owner";
    repo = "git-repo";
    rev = finalAttrs.version;
    hash = "sha256-VcQRSss2dssfkJ+iUb5qT+FJ10GHiFDzySigcmuVI+8=";
  };
in {
  inherit src;
  pname = "php-app";
  version = "1.0.0";

  composerVendorCache = php.buildComposerDeps {

>     inherit src;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    inherit (finalAttrs) src;
```

Author: fixed

  };
}
```

> ### Building PHP projects {#ssec-building-php-projects}

Reviewer 2: Please take this with caution, as I'm still pretty new to Nix. The following is nothing new, as we probably have the same situation with `phar` files already. But the new approach opens the possibility to use `composer audit`:

Would it make sense to have the testPhase executing `composer audit`? I'm not sure whether all people are aware of the effect of providing a `composer.lock` for software. It would result in locked dependencies, shifting the security updates from users to the maintainers. Not everyone is used to Nix, some might only know `composer req --global` where the user is in charge and could do security updates.

I expect a growing list of PHP derivations thanks to making it so easy to package PHP projects with the new approach. I fear some might not be aware of the security maintenance shift when maintainer bundle the software (providing phar or composer.lock). Leading to insecure software distribution via nix. A `composer audit` might help here to prevent building unsecure versions. Maintainers of the nix packages could provide PRs upstream to update `composer.lock` files in order to keep Nix packages secure.

What do you think? This could be opt-out, e.g. by `runComposerAudit = true` being the default, allowing users to remove the audit step for individual packages.

Could also be an improvement or another issue as follow-up to the current PR, in order to not block your awesome work. I'm really looking forward to having the new builder in nixpkgs.

Author: Thanks Daniel! I will add it to the checkphase and provide an option to make it optional.

Reviewer: I think that requires network access so it will not really work in `checkPhase`. And since it would change over time, doing it within a derivation is not really a good place from reproducibility point of view. Probably best left for some external tool like vulnix.

And yeah, this is a downside of per-project dependencies compared to having a single distro-wide version of a package. In the worst case, we can apply patches to the lockfile, which was not possible with PHARs.

Author: Thanks Jan. We can even override composer.json now if needed.
